---
layout: page
title: The Paradox of J.W. Goethe
description: We look at only what we know and understand
tags: knowledge-society information-society
---

![J.W. Goethe]({{ site.url }}/images/post/goethe.jpg){:width="800px"}

Clay tablets, papyrus, parchments, paper, are some supports to contain
texts, used by humans being to “freeze” their knowledge and to share it
with other people. Texts contains the author’s knowledge, that he
describes by means of a natural language and formalizes through the use
of its syntax. For example, in the past many scientific knowledge were
written in Latin on parchments, today in English on paper.

When the texts were written by hand, if someone needed to have some
information, it was necessary to write it all over again on a new
support, of course, by hand. This process was too slow to disseminate
knowledge and to share it properly. Only in the 15th century, Johann
Gutenberg invented the technology to come through this problem: the
printing press with movable type. Now the author can disseminate his
knowledge towards many people at the same time. We could say that the
process of one-to-many communication was born and a new kind of society
based on the value of the information began to exist: the Information
Society.

Today, thanks to computing, we do not need clay tablets or paper to
“freeze” our knowledge. Now we can use word processors and files to
write and contain texts. We can share texts through Internet and people
can now read e-Books and e-Newspapers on devices like iPad or Kindle.
But the way to “freeze” and to transfer knowledge from a man to other
men is still the same one used at the times of the ancient sumerian (the
inventors of writing). In fact, from that age, nothing has really
changed in the learning process of knowledge: the author must write in
some natural language that he knows, and whoever would like to add new
knowledge to the author’s must read the text, understand the contents
and memorize the notions. Computing has only dematerialized supports,
nothing else.

However, the Information Technologies offer new functions to retrieve
information in a very fast way, thanks to search engines. That was
absolute impossible to do before.

But these technologies don’t allow to overcome the problem that Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe had already stigmatized when he said **“man looks at
only what he knows and understands!”** (Was man weiss, sieht man erst!).
In fact, the search engine can’t help us to find things that we don’t
know already, because if someone needs to look for something, he must
already know something about the topic, otherwise, he can’t put the
right keyword in the search box.

In other words, I don’t know which are the proper words used in my
language to represent the subject that I don’t know and don’t understand
yet. Even more, is impossible for me to know anything about something I
don’t know.

*by Luca Severini, July 2010, Oxford, UK*

 
