---
layout: page
title: A Phiposopher in every organization
description: Philosophers have expertise to interpreter the role of Knowledge Engineer
tags: knowledge-representation knowledge-society ontology philosophy semantic-web
---

![Companies]({{ site.url }}/images/post/companies.jpg){:width="800px"}

As far as the knowledge of a company grows, also difficulty in accessing
and effectively use it increases.

The number of things and facts that should be accounted for in the
knowledge base of any organization gets continuously greater – new laws,
rules, practices as well as changes in the economic, social and
technological scenario make them appear, and new additional or revised
categories are needed to properly comply with new requirements and
interests.

The quantity of information flowing through offices too increases –
workers may not get aware of everything could be relevant to their work.

Assets and personnel of the company may be spread over the planet and
there is neither time nor money to have people travelling from place to
place to explain novelties and teach how to deal with them.

Yet, the greater richness of today and tomorrow society is its store of
knowledge. It is just a pity that to use it stays so difficult in spite
of large expenses to deploy state-of-the-art information & knowledge
management systems. The weak point is the interface between knowledge
and users like the workers of a company. Such an interface should be
much more than the on screen output of an IT service.

Decades ago there were eldest workers who had care of newcomers by
transferring them day by day their knowledge while working together. An
eldest worker could give also proactively an information, a hint to a
newcomer about something that s/he perhaps would not even consider.
Because the eldest worker not only has knowledge but is also a wise in
that job.

Nowadays, instead of eldest workers, too urged on to accomplish their
tasks quickly and efficiently, there are training courses for classes of
rookies and, most of all, IT services that should help them in
productively using the store of knowledge gathered over time within the
organization. But in order to access, discover and use this knowledge,
they must foresee what is to be found so as to pose the right query to
the system – otherwise they will waste their time with *noise*,
especially thanks to “maybe you are interested also in” utilities. That
is the inescapable consequence of so-called semantic technologies, at
least as far as the semantics is that of natural languages in which
knowledge is typically encoded.

The key to render knowledge management systems really effective is to
recover that part of human knowledge that usually gets lost: wisdom.
That is the interface one really needs! It needs a sort of wise who not
only gives answers, but also helps to formulate questions, since he
knows things and knows when they are needed. That is also the reason why
we say “a philosopher in every organization”.

![Logics]({{ site.url }}/images/post/logics.jpg){:width="620px"}

The philosopher will not be the company sage. S/he will help you to
build your own wisdom management system. That will be your sage! It will
help your workers in sharing effectively their knowledge and
competencies, while the philosopher stays shoulder to shoulder with
workers, collects experiences together with knowledge, give them the
proper formal dress and put them into the system in such a way that
punctual information will easily flow towards who needs it.

It is precisely this new professionalism who owns the right skills to
properly “teach” a machine about human knowledge, thanks to prior deep
understanding of human mind, and then for the ability to formalize the
relevant part by abstracting from contingent aspects, such as a
particular natural language first of all: the right language for
knowledge sharing through computers is just that of Logic.

It is precisely over a basis of logically structured knowledge that
automated inferential reasoning assures certain answers instead of a
range of probably relevant results. So that computers can directly use
and offer knowledge instead of pointing to documents to be read and
studied. No need to teach a computer to deal with a human language in
which knowledge is encoded. We teach the computer just the pieces of
information and weave out knowledge.

That which is needed is not a completely new professionalism, since
there is already people whose task is to formalize knowledge in order to
‘feed’ a knowledge based system – they are usually called knowledge
engineers. The difference however lies in the specific preparation and
perceptiveness of these personnel: they do not simply formalize
knowledge. They are there to observe, investigate and discover what is
really useful and worth to be stored in the knowledge base of your
organization.

The philosophers that we propose you are able to conduct an inquiry on
your specific activity, not relying exclusively on that which you and/or
your selected experts have told them. They study your activity and
observe your workers, and then deliver a modeling of the knowledge that
the organization, as a whole, uses, operates on and needs to effectively
and profitably share.

You may check and discuss the proposed modeling directly with the
persons who have made it. You will be able to hear full explanations
about why something has been represented in that or that other way. You
will always keep the control on what is going on with the most precious
asset of your organization – its knowledge – since we want precisely to
make you able to better use it. We are not going to sell black-box
services.

The structure of the knowledge base can be continuously modified – our
approach allows for that – so that it will be able to account for new
emerging needs and business interests by integrating at very low cost
additional elements to the description of your organization and to the
representation of its knowledge.

Such a knowledge base will never become obsolete. Even if the
technologies change, it needs not to.

As well as the knowledge base keeps on serving you and your business,
also our professionals will stay in your organization to maintain the
knowledge services, also by upgrading the KB as soon as they identify
new elements to be recorded. They will not be there just to accomplish a
single project, rather they will accompany your organization towards the
Knowledge Economy.

Moreover, our professionals, who are knowledge engineers and
philosophers at the same time, will bring flexibility together with
wisdom to the interface of the IT systems – which surely contain the
largest part of the knowledge of an organization. Every knowledge
representation depends on a particular point of view. But a philosopher
may offer her ability to compose multiple different perspectives over
the same, single base of knowledge expressed in the universal language
of logic.

Different perspectives may be interesting for different areas of the
same organization or different business activities – even for different
customers of your organization – so that the same knowledge can be
expressed, displayed, communicated to the different audiences in the
best fitting way for each one. Imagine a system that knows what
different kinds of clients are interested in and that gives them
precisely what they look for. And imagine the benefit for the
business-to-business relationships of your organization.

*by Luca Severini, March 2012, Rome, IT*
